Thanks for listening. Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science
fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. George R.R. Martin is one of a group of new
writers born in the post-war baby boom who is becoming a powerful force in the
field of science fiction. We asked Martin his definition of science fiction.
Science fiction isn't about science. It's what about all literature is about.
It's about people and moral issues and the way people relate to each other and
good and bad and love and death and pain and sorrow and all of that stuff. The
only thing that's different about it is it uses a different set of symbols. It
tries to get us out of our here and now world, just as traditional fantasy has
done for centuries. But instead of using fantasy type symbols, it uses symbols
drawn from what essentially is the new religion of our modern age, science and
technology. The theme that pervades much of Martin's early work is the intrusion
of cold, hard reality into romance. Martin comments on this element. The dreams
that I grew up with, that other writers of my generation grew up with, Howard
Waldrop, John Varley, people like that have spoken about it in their own
writings. And then the reality unfolded. Our dreams came true. But they didn't.
It wasn't the same dreams. It changed. And in most cases, it changed for the
worse. For the worse. There was a story of mine called Patrick Henry, Jupiter
and a Little Red Brick Spaceship that's included in Songs of Stars and Shadows.
Probably not one of my most famous stories or one of my better stories. But it's
one in which this particular question is addressed in a very direct kind of
manner because I use a protagonist who feels the same way. The World Science
Fiction Convention, when Apollo 11 landed on the moon, gave them a special award
for Best Moon Landing Ever, which I think is completely untrue. In science
fiction, there are lots of moon landings that are much more exciting than the
one that Apollo 11 did. In fact, that's the whole point that I support the space
program i dream of uh i think it's a route that mankind should go to and in some
ways it's it's very tragic what's happened to it and what's happened to it is
that nasa really messed it up they took the greatest adventure in human history
and through a supreme superhuman effort and managed to make it boring and that's
what's happened to the american space program and that's what i tried to address
in that particular uh story but the theme in other contexts runs through a lot
of my work, particularly my early work. The fact that we need dreams to sustain
us, and that the dreams are often, I mean that's part of with Morning Comes
Mistfall too, the dreams are better than the reality. Truth and beauty. Beauty
is truth. Truth, beauty that is all you know and all you need to know, but it's
not true. Some things are beautiful but not true. And some things are true but
not beautiful. I grew up in Bayonne, New Jersey. Little industrial city right
outside of New York. At the time, it was one of the major oil refining centers
in the world. It was true, but it wasn't very beautiful.
I read books that took place on Mars and the asteroid belt and planets of other
stars. They were pretty beautiful in their way, but they weren't true.
Things don't work out that conveniently. And that's the whole reality romance
thing that much of my work does concern itself. In an early Martin story, Slide
Show, the space effort is maintained through contributions garnered at
fundraisers. But I wanted to express the fact that I did have reservations and
humanitarian concerns and all that about that Earth. But I still think the
weight of that story is very much towards the space thing, and how pitiful it
has become where they have to go around and give slideshows to rich people and
hope to get a little contributions to continue it. But I do see us going that
way. More on George Martin in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Bill Vernon. Our show today continues the discussion with
science fiction author George Martin. While we were interviewing Martin, he
expressed to us his idea that the American space program is in the doldrums
because of a poor public relations effort by NASA. According to Martin, if NASA
were to play on people's dreams of exploring the unknown rather than to harp on
the mundane tangible benefits, the space program would be much better off. Part
of the reason that we're going that way is the way NASA has sold it. I mean,
it's totally, totally inappropriate. They're trying to make people, they have
people who are poor, they have people who are suffering through social cutbacks,
they have people who don't have enough to eat, whose children are ill-clothed,
who are suffering from poverty and crime and stuff like that. In other words,
who have a hell of a lot of problems in their life. And they're trying to say,
well, we're cutting back social programs, but we don't want to cut back the
space programming, You ought to support this decision because it gave you Teflon
frying pans. Now, if somebody doesn't have any chicken to cook up, the fact that
their frying pan may have Teflon on it is not going to convince them. And the
fact that the space program produced Teflon frying pans is of little interest to
them. Ditto hand calculators. And all of the other benefits the space program is
supposed to have brought us and didn't de-browd us. But these same people have
television sets on which they watch sports. You know, probably were all very
excited about the Super Bowl and the World Series.
Follow Adventure Series and all that. And there's the potential support for the
space program. Not the practical, dull accountant's cell where they show them
the balance sheets and say, well, here's all the Teflon, you know. If you want
to get public support by a space program, you have to get it by making it
exciting, by making it an adventure.
And it is an adventure. It's a colossal adventure. It's enormously exciting. Why
the hell am I addicted to it? Why are all these people here? Why didn't our
entire generation growing up, reading Willy Lay and Werner von Braun and what
was going to happen and the dinosaur projects and the flying wing and the space
stations we were going to have. It was marvelous, heady, wonderful stuff. And
instead they're selling us Teflon. I mean, it's just nonsense. It's the
excitement of it that they should sell us. strange things that might be
discovered, the adventures that are there to be had, the dream of it. That's the
real powering thing. Not that they're going to be able to make better ball
bearings in space because of weightlessness, but the dream of it. That's what
they should push.
Music plays a major role in many of Martin's works from stories such as the
Lonely Songs of Laren Dorr and For a Single Yesterday to the titles of two of his
collections A Song for Lya and The Songs of Stars and Shadows. A popular song,
Brandy, even influenced the plot of the short story Fast Friends. We asked
Martin if he himself as a musician. Well, none whatsoever. No background
whatsoever. I like songs, music, but I really have no aptitude for it. I used to
live with, when I was living in Chicago, I had a number of musician roommates
for a while, and they would bring in other musician friends of theirs who would
invariably because the whole group were musically inclined in one way or another
it would say to me what instrument do you play and I would say I played a
typewriter that's about the closest I've gotten more on George Martin in our
next show
this has been the science fiction radio show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. Science fiction writer George Martin is the
subject of our show today. Martin spent almost a decade writing short stories
before he published his first novel. Here he comments on the importance of the
short story to the beginning writer. I think that's just the way you break into
the field, and that's one of the strengths of science fiction is that it's one
of the few branches of literature that still has a viable short story market
where young writers and beginning writers can learn the ropes, can get their
initial publication. Novels, on the other hand, are not the best way to begin,
as Martin tells us. Novels are large. Novels are formidable pieces of work. You
just don't knock them off in a week or so. And you really have to know what
you're doing.
I wrote a lot of short stories in my early years. Some of them are good, I like
to think. Some of them are maybe even excellent. And some of them are terrible.
And I learned a lot through the process of doing that and also through the
process of selling them. If I had been writing novels, I mean, it's very easy to
wash out writing novels. You spend a year and a half writing a book and then no
one wants to buy it. It's terrible or it falls apart at the end. Part of it's
good, part of it's bad. That's a bad way to begin, I think. I've always felt
that it's much better, especially in a field like science fiction where you can
publish your short stories for any kind of young writer to begin with short
stories, to learn his craft there, also to establish a name for himself by
selling to the markets. It's a much sounder commercial strategy. Martin believes
that if one does not establish himself as a short story writer first, it's more
difficult to break into print. You see in the modern, present commercial
marketplace of literature, you see a whole lot of books coming out, first
novels. There's nothing that's more deadly than a first novel. That did not
always be the case in science fiction. Once upon a time, there was a large
enough audience that bought every science fiction book that came out that a
writer publishing his first novel could be short a certain minimum thing.
Science fiction's gotten too big for that now. That's no longer the case. So a
lot of people, Joe Blow writes his first novel, sells it because it's pretty
good, it gets published, and just dies a dismal, dreary death because no one's
ever heard of him. So unless he has some gimmick, unless there's some reason,
Nobody reads this novel. Nobody gives him a chance. The way I did it in
hindsight is much the better way. I built up a reputation over five or six years
for my short stories, and when I finally did write Dying of the Light, my first
novel, it was not by Joe Blow. It was the first novel by George R. R. Martin,
with trumpets, drumroll, and the world was much more receptive to it than had I
thrown it out beforehand. So I think any writer wanting to break into science
fiction should begin with short stories and should make a reputation with those
and then make the transition to novels. At the end of each story in Martin's
collections is a date and a location. We asked Martin why he ends his stories in
this manner. Instead of writing the end, you put where you were and what time
the story was written. It helps put them in a chronological perspective for
readers who are interested in observing the writer's growth because the order
that they're published in is often not at all an appropriate indication of the
order that they were written in, publishing schedules being what they are. Some
stories are rushed into print, some are held for years. Some stories you can't
sell for years, and you finally find a place for them, and they come out five
years after you wrote them.
So to really get an idea of the kind of evolution changes a writer goes through,
those sorts of dates are important. In our next show, we'll discuss Martin's
novel, Dying of the Light.
This has been the science fiction radio show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Bill Vernon. In today's show, we continue our discussion
with science fiction writer George Martin. Martin's first novel was the
enthusiastically received, critically acclaimed Dying of the Light. The story
behind the title of this novel is interesting. I wrote the book as After the
Festival, which was my title for it. I sold the book to Pocket Books at the same
time I sold a version to Analog for serialization in Analog magazine, and they
wanted it cut considerably. So I cut for them by 30,000 words, which is a pretty
substantial cut. And when I did that, I said, well, I want this serial version
published under a different title, because I don't want people reading the
serial and thinking they've read the book. Not one near 30,000 words difference.
The book is a lot better than the serial. So, I told the editor of Analog to
call the serial version Mockman, because my book was going to be called After
the Festival, which I had written it under. He didn't like the title Mach Man,
but he kind of agreed under protest. Then my book publisher calls back and says
that the higher-up, Peter Mayer, who was running the company at the time, big
publishing hotshot, not a science fiction editor, but the head of the whole
Pocket Books empire then, he didn't like After the Festival as a title. because
it wasn't science fictional enough. They were willing to make it after the Star
Festival, but that gave me goose bumps and made me want to decapitate someone,
so I said no-no. But they threw out after the Festival, so I had to come up with
a new title. And I came up with about 12 of them, most of which were pretty
limp, and I sent in the list of these 12, kind of dreading which what they would
pick, because I didn't like any of them. And then, two days after I sent in the
list, I thought of Dying in a Light, and I liked that title a great deal. I
liked it almost as much as after the festival. It's real close. Right now, I
wouldn't know which title I like best. They're both very appropriate for the
book. And the publisher liked Dying in a Light, and I sent it in two days after
the list of 12 bad suggestions. The publisher said, oh, Dying of the Light,
that's fine. We'll call it that. At that point, I called up the editor of Analog
and said, well, I still want a different title, but After the Festival is now
free because the publisher changed it, so call the serial version After the
Festival. So my original title was used on the serial version, and the Dying of
the Light title from Thomas was used on the book, the fuller version. One of the
themes Martin explores in Dying of the Light is that of the misunderstanding
that can develop between people from different cultures. A very significant
point of the whole book is the role of names, which I call it in the book, the
importance of names, really the importance of language and linguistics, to what
we are able to think, to what we are able to conceive. The hero of Dying of the
Light, the protagonist, gets in trouble throughout the book because he insists
on making false translations. He'll see something and he'll say, well, these
people are slaves. But they're not slaves. They're, you know, there's a word for
it in the book, an alien word, and it's different. There are important
differences from slavery, but he sees it only in his own terms. He sees people,
and he has to define them as friends, let us say. When the word is tein, it
means something very different, similar in some ways, different in other ways,
And to really understand another culture, you have to be able to think in their
language, in their terms, and not make false translations to your own terms that
simplify and distort simply by the act of translating. More on George Martin in
our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, A production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. 1980 was a successful year for science
fiction author George Martin. Martin received the Hugo Award for his short story
The Way of Crossin' Dragon and both the Hugo and Nebula Awards for his novelette
Sand Kings. Sand Kings is one of those timeless stories that is destined to be a
classic. In 1981, the novel Windhaven was published. It was written by Martin in
conjunction with Lisa Tuttle. Well, every collaboration is different. It's like
a marriage. There are no rules. With Lisa, it was a very easy sort of
collaboration. We had talked about collaboration with good friends and all that.
When we got together, we talked out the initial story, then began to write it.
The way it would work is one of us would start, would write a certain amount of
pages, say 20 pages, ship them off to the other. The second one would rewrite
that section and then go on and write some more material and ship the thing
back. The first writer would rewrite the portion. The second writer would go on.
So each of us essentially rewrote the other one's sections. And we alternated
doing the first drafts, after having worked out the broad outlines of the plot
together in conference. Took place through the mail. We learned that Windhaven
as a novel was not the original intent of Martin and Tuttle. Rather, it started
out as a shorter story. Actually, it began as a much shorter story, a thing
called My Brother's Wings, that we completed in collaboration. I showed it to
Ben Bova, he said, It doesn't really end satisfactorily. It needs to be much
longer, and he was right, and we went back and we expanded it and we produced
the storms at Windhaven but I think by the time we finished that, it was pretty
clear to us that there needed to be more. By the time we did One Wing years
later, we let years elapse in between the writing of the first and second parts
we knew exactly what we were doing, we had the structure of the entire book and
the role that One Wing played both in relation to storms that came before in
relation to the fall that came after. So by then, one wing was written, both as
an individual entity and as part of the book. Much of the novel's action is
centered on the characters flying about on wings mounted on and powered by their
arms. We asked Martin about the research he did to ensure that the mechanical
aspects of flying are practical. Well, I did some research on hang gliding. I
got some books on it and read so I'd be able to give the story to verisimilitude
required. And we must have done fairly well in terms of accuracy because Hang
Gliding Magazine serialized Storms of Windhaven after it came out. So,
obviously, they would not have done it if it had been too full of egregious
errors.
And, in fact, I noticed I picked up—years after that the original story came out
in Hang Gliding Magazine, I picked up another issue of Hang Gliding Magazine on
the stands. I discovered that all these people were selling Windhaven altimeters
and the Windhaven brand Regalo sales, like a brand name or something like that,
so it impressed someone out there. Martin explained the plans he and Tuttle have
for Windhaven. My conception of it is as a real trilogy. That is to say, neither
one big book, nor a series of unrelated books, but essentially we began two
stories when we began Windhaven. We began the story of Marist of Lesser
Amberley, which ended at the end of Windhaven, and we also began a story about
the social changes initiated by Marist, and that social changes, rippling
through the culture, affecting all sorts of things, that story is not concluded.
That story requires more volumes. but hopefully there's only there will only be
the two of them that we have originally conceived if you know if that if you
look around ten years from now and you find that I'm working on the ninth
Windhaven book with Lisa you will know that I have sold out and hopefully that
will not happen
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas